ivenn LHD schooling society is one of
the most influential books in the
history of political philosophy that
you've never heard about why is it so
influential well for one thing it does
not have a lot of competition in
philosophy of Education
say what you will it's a really curious
thing that in modern Western
civilization so many people are employed
in the education sector and there's so
much that can change with philosophical
debate in the education I mean really
you might think that philosophy a ssin
would be the most active bookshelf in
the philosophy department of your
academic elaborate but it's not there's
a paucity of material in that department
and there's a terrible paucity of new
ideas now Ivan Illich therefore became a
big fish in a small pond when he
published this book back in 1971 it is
also true that he came out with a style
of rhetoric that was simultaneously
appealing to people on the far left and
people on the far right and kind of
anarchists and free thinkers and Aunty
anti-establishment figures in between
now gonna say why am I making this video
I am NOT making this video as an
introduction to this book I think almost
nobody who watches this video will read
the book at most some of you will watch
this video think oh that's interesting
and maybe download a PDF from the
internet and read a few paragraphs and
throw this away the style of rhetoric
here has not aged well and if you're
really sincerely interested in education
policy the politics of education reform
you will very quickly come to the
conclusion this book is now of
absolutely no practical value zero for
the debates we have going on in the
education sector today but nevertheless
this book is a major influential work in
the history of philosophy especially in
history of philosophy of philosophy of
Education um it's still worth knowing
about so if if you're wondering whether
or not this video is gonna end in like a
recommendation a thumbs up or a thumbs
down should you read the book no no you
shouldn't read the book and if you take
a look at the book yourself if you if
you put Ivan Illich into YouTube today
and found this video because you
thinking about whether or not this book
was worth reading I can tell you
confidently no it is not worth reading
and I don't even see that with any hate
in my heart um in his private life his
faith and values Ivan Illich was one of
these guys who was a mix of left-wing
and right-wing impulses he was devoutly
religious he was not just a little bit
Christian and at the same time there's
this profound disappointment with the
edifice of Western civilization at a
time when Latin America was in many ways
uncritically emulating institutional and
political arrangements that they saw in
the United States and Western Europe so
you know a country like Colombia or
Bolivia was in an historical period
where their idea of development was
imitating the United States England
France etc and this is a guy who was
deeply dissatisfied with that and the
whole book just rages against the
concepts of organized education itself
yes the social hierarchy and social
inequality that is absolutely built into
that system education and it indulges in
the most dishonest and misleading
rhetoric imaginable in support in that
argument so look Ivan Illich what we
gonna say for me the real moral of the
story has to do with philosophy as
opposed to empirical methods we have
this tradition in Western Europe that
you can be a philosopher and argue a
point without the slightest concern
about empirical reality whatsoever in
this book this book is part of that
proud tradition um writing in 1971 he
was looking back on the reforms to
education that had just transpired in
the United States of America in the
decade of the 1960s and this book is
absolutely no interest in the facts
absolutely no interest in an evaluation
of what was successful was not
successful in the decade of 1950 let me
tell you some guys impart as broad
brushstrokes nobody in 1971 was thinking
that education in America had been
better in the 1950s
than it was in the 1970s and if you want
one word to summarize why that is the
one word would be racism the reforms
that you know Ivan Illich just
completely dismisses and condemns he
just says oh they wasted so many billion
dollars this money just disappeared
absolutely no good came out of this
period of reform and education as it's
America come on this was a period when
for African Americans for black people
in America they went from having
incredibly poor education to attempting
I mean the concept of universal
education tenable history United States
America that's what Universal means
Universal means they were for the first
time making a sincere effort to give
equal opportunities to blacks Hispanics
non-white people in essence America and
yes poor white people were also there
was an open question of that and Ilic is
coming straight out the gate in the
first chapters of the book no it just
totally withering dismissal that this
period of reform and expansion education
system in the United States this is just
a total failure then it was self
evidently a failure there's absolutely
nothing good to be seen in it and guys
you do not have to be a terribly close
or attentive student of the history of
education reform in a States to know
that this is in the parlance of our time
now you know what so again this
this book does not use empirical methods
it's not interested in chemical reality
but looking through it I'm trying to
find okay so what is the empirical basis
for this theory this philosophy of
education and he has just a few little
examples again reflecting his Christian
heritage he has an example of one of the
church groups in the United States who
decided that they needed to educate a
bunch of their pastors a bunch of their
preachers they needed to educate a bunch
of their own religious leaders in the
Spanish language in speaking Spanish so
he gives this as a positive example they
didn't rely on people who had formal
credentials they didn't rely on people
at a university education they didn't
rely on a
formal you know organized system of
schooling they instead put an
advertisement in the newspaper saying
that they were looking for fluent
speakers of the Spanish language to come
in and spend time doing one-on-one
practice with these Christian I'm sorry
I forget which if they were priests or
what their rank was but these Christian
preachers and you know helping us be
saying he said the majority of the
people who saw the advertisement and
volunteered were Ori I was a paid
position it only lasted a few months he
said the majority of them were high
school dropouts or otherwise had no
formal education and how to teach a
language and this is a positive example
he said the results were much much
better than they could have gotten by
then by you know putting these guys in a
university classroom or what have you
okay cute you think this is a basis for
overturning the concept of a credential
itself okay let me tell you something
image I just paid a ton of money to have
a formally qualified language teacher
teach me the Chinese language the
teacher I had did have a university
education did have formal credentials
did have a certain type of cultural
refinement an educational background
that a high school dropout would not
have if you just think about it from the
clients perspective from my perspective
as a student I do not believe in legend
I do not believe your one empirical
example that I can find in this book
there's probably one or two others I'm
forget but there's almost nothing I do
not believe that I will get equally
positive results if I just put an ad in
the newspaper and hire a high school
dropout to teach me the Chinese language
okay it's Chinese in my case it's
Spanish significance I don't believe
that and you know what the whole book is
just ranting against snobbery the
snobbery of the rich the school system
does nothing but create the meaningless
you know snobbery and oppression of one
social class against another okay you
know what you can call me a snob
if I'm paying money to spend many many
hours in the classroom with a teacher I
know I'm willing to own up to that
Ivan Ivan Illich I'm going to own up to
the fact that I really enjoyed and
appreciated my education more by having
a highly refined highly educated person
spend all those hours in the classroom
with me teaching me this language as
opposed to spending that time with a
high school dropout so even if you think
it is just snobbery if you dismiss the
whole edifice of how the university
education is were as nothing but
snobbery that snobbery is still worth
money to me as a client and this is
using your example Ivan Illich which is
at the sort of you know weak end of the
spectrum you know like yes it is true if
you want to learn Spanish
you could learn Spanish just by spending
quality time with your own grandmother
if your grandmother speaks Spanish and
you don't just by spending quality time
with that school it's true that's
possible you know what's not possible I
don't think I could learn how to become
a surgeon by just hanging out with some
high schooler I don't think I can
learn how to repair an aircraft engine
to spec reliably without formal
classroom education formal exams
formal certifications when you look at
other areas of the economy Ivan there
are so many examples that don't favor
you are philosophy of Education
it's ridiculous like this book I see why
it was so popular I see why it has been
so influential the style of writing is
just so rambunctious it's just the the
seething discontentment with Western
civilization leaps off the page these
really over the top turns of phrase
through it and you know it's okay in
English I assume it sounds even better
in Spanish translation I don't know I've
been told by one of my regular viewers
that it's still influential in France so
I guess the French translation is just
you know bristling with this
anti-establishment sentimentality but as
as a philosophy of education this is
complete horseshit is it's not
convincing at all
and in terms of you know just looking at
the project negatively as a critique of
education I have to say you know the
lack of empirical methods here means
that it doesn't even hold up as a
critique you can't read this it's
published in 1971 you can't even read it
in its own historical setting and say
this still stands up today as a critique
of what went wrong with education in the
1960s you know so that that's a pretty
terrible weakness you know I'm sorry it
neither holds up as a critique or a
program for reform of Education that
makes sense today in the 21st century
nor does it hold up as a critique read
in its own times so I'll just mention um
you know this book one of the things
that is praised for interestingly is
that it anticipated the internet so the
positive part of his plan you know the
internet didn't exist in 1971 he said
look instead of you know the university
system he sets down some ideas that
still today would be appealing to
right-wing libertarians of having a
voucher system of the government
actually giving parents the money
directly so that parents can decide for
themselves how the money is spent on
their child's education how the children
get in the workforce oh there's more in
formal education um interesting and he
thinks that particular students can find
particular tutors coaches through having
a network of information where people
conduct just interesting
so in today's terms it's an interesting
idea in 1971 and it really comes out of
this kind of folklore centered view of
skills
I mean he's sitting there looking at the
way knowledge is transmitted in a
traditional village setting in Latin
America and again which examples you
choose can be decisive you know so yes
he does point out again and again
through the books that most people learn
to speak a language not in the classroom
but by spending time with their
grandparents or by he gives the example
he says that more people learn
language through their girlfriend
through falling in love you know not
through university education okay
interesting interesting example but how
do you learn how to repair an aircraft
engine how to disassemble and reassemble
an aircraft engine and how do you write
an exam proving you can do that in a
reliable way that doesn't put people's
lives in harm's way you know which
examples you select are are crucial but
in the 1970s there was a political term
that was popular mostly with
right-wingers you know folk ways of
looking at folklore and traditional
knowledge and villages and he's saying
look so somebody in this village knows
how to repair a truck knows how to
operate farm machinery knows how to use
a loom traditional weaving to create
clothing why can't we just have an
Internet of ideas where there's one
person who posts on the Internet
they want to learn how to weave and
somebody else posts they're an old
grandmother they want to teach someone
out of weave and there's no classroom
there's no University and money is paid
person gets paid to coach somebody else
and human skills are transmitted in this
way and it's so much more effective
everybody interesting and it's
interesting that he said that back in
1971 when there was no such thing as an
internet cool guys be real okay
today on Craigslist who's gonna do this
who is this gonna work for I'm not say
it's gonna work for nobody okay right
now if I want to learn Hebrew I don't
but let's say I decide I want to migrate
to Israel how really am I gonna learn
Hebrew am I gonna put an ad on
Craigslist and set up this type of
completely informal arrangement am I
going to at the opposite extreme
formally enroll in a university program
that will give me a credential write an
exam or half way in the middle there are
other types of institutionalized
learning in education like obviously
churches and synagogues um in the
history of education both medieval and
modern there are a lot of other forms of
institutionalized and formalized
education other than you know the
American model of the universe
system but we have to be honest with
ourselves about the reasons why the
American system is so successful
look China I live in China right now has
one of the most extreme histories
imaginable of reforms to education but
at the end of that process having tried
out so many different extreme ideas the
system they've settled on really to say
they were open to new ideas is an
understatement
this is one of the in the history of the
20th century China must have the
greatest diversity of attempts to
totally disassemble and reassemble
education from the ground up and in the
end the system that created is not so
different from the American system of
Education working from empirical methods
those questions are really worth asking
and worth answering not that the
American Standard is an ideal that
Columbia or Brazil should uncritically
aspire to I mean in a sense Ivan Illich
has a really good point there we need to
question this we need to think very
carefully about why are we maybe
unwittingly imitating both the
advantages and disadvantages of the
philosophy of Education of the modern
Western world but there are hard
criteria that education ultimately has
to correspond to either we can trust you
with this job to disassemble and
reassemble this aircraft engine or we
can't either
you are a real surgeon or you're not and
even for me I mean he chooses the
example of language education because it
favors his argument why did I want to be
in a formal university setting instead
of just learning Chinese hanging out
with my girlfriend or you know these
more informal examples he gives rather
than this kind of folklore approach or
rather than just putting an ad on
Craigslist and saying hey does anyone
have an elderly grandmother you know who
speaks Chinese fluently you know in
Vancouver there must be a ton who has a
bored grandmother in Vancouver who
speaks Chinese their first language who
can sit down and spend 300 hours with me
tutoring me in Chinese why do you think
that
from the perspective of the student
there are compelling reasons to prefer a
formal education setting as opposed to
inform one from the perspective of the
employer there are just so many reasons
why you're gonna hire someone who has a
credential someone who has not only
learned Chinese but can prove to you
that they learn Chinese guys Ivan Illich
dreamed a dream and he remains a
footnote in the history of philosophy
education one of the most influential
guys who ever did it if you want to read
this book you can dream along with them
but for me the real moral the story is
philosophy is a problem-solving method
and we have to be looking at empirical
evidence real-world evidence facts from
the ground up at the beginning and the
middle and the end of our inquiries